###

Make I start with Mises’s solution. Wetin be de logical status of a typical economic proposition like de law of marginal utility (dat whenever de supply of a good wey e b say units dey regarded as equal serviceability by person come increase by one additional unit, de value wey dey attached to dis unit gats decrease as e go only fit dey employed as a means for de attainment of a goal wey dey considered less valuable dan de least valuable goal previously satisfied by a unit of dis good) or of de quantity deory of money (say whenever de quantity of money come increase while de demand for money wey suppose dey hand as reserve nor change, de purchasing power of money go fall)?

As e dey formulate e answer, Mises be face double challenge. For one side, the answer wey modern empiricism offer dey. De Vienna Ludwig von Mises know say truely na one of the first centres of empiricist movement: place wey be don dey establish itself as de dominant academic philosophy of de Western world for plenty decades, and till today, dey shape de image wey almost all de economists get dia own discipline.[^2]

[^2]: On de Vienna Circle make you see Viktor Kraft, *Der Wiener Kreis* (Wien: Springer, 1968); for empiricist-positivist interpretations of economics go check representative works like Terrence W. Hutchison, *De Significance and Basic Postulates of Economic Deory* (London: Macmillan, 1938). Hutchison, wey dey follow de Popperian variant of empiricism, since don become much less enthusiastic about de prospects of a Popperized economics—see, for instance, e *Knowledge and Ignorance in Economics* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977)—yet he nor still see alternative rather than to dey with Popper’s falsification is. Also go check Milton Friedman, “De Methodology of Positive Economics” in idem, *Essays in Positive Economics* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953); Mark Blaug, *De Methodology of Economics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980); a positivist account by person wey attend Mises’s Privat-Seminar in Vienna is Felix Kaufmann, *Methodology of de Social Sciences* (New York: Humanities Press, 1958); de dominance of empiricism in economics dey documented by de fact say dere probably nor get single textbook wey nor dey explicitly classify economics as—what else?—an empirical (a posteriori) science.

Empiricism dey consider nature and de natural science as e model. To dey follow empiricism, de examples of economic propositions wey we just mention get de same logical status wey laws of nature get. Like laws of nature, dem state hypothetical relationships wey dey two or more events, and e go dey in de form of if-den statements. And like hypotheses of de natural sciences, de propositions of economics dey require continuous testing thru experience. A proposition wey concern  de relationship between economic events no go fit ever dey validated once and for all wen e go dey sure. Instead, e dey foreva subject to wetin go come out from contingent, future experiences. Such experience fit confirm de hypothesis. But this nor go prove say de hypothesis na true, since de economic proposition go use general terms (for philosophical terminology, universals) for e description of de related events and so go apply to an indefinite number of cases or instances, for de process, always leaving room for possibly falsifying future experiences. All wetin confirmation go prove na say de hypothesis neva turn out to dey wrong. On de other hand, de experience fit falsify de hypothesis. This go surely prove say somethin bin dey wrong with de hypothesis as e bin dey, but nor go prove say de hypothesized relationship between de specified events nor for fit dey observed.  E go merely show say considering and controlling person observations only what up to now don dey accounted for and controlled, de relationship neva show up yet.  E nor fit just dey ruled out, sha, say e fit show up as soon as some oder circumstances don dey under control.

The attitude that this philosophy fuels and that has indeed become characteristic of most contemporary economists and their way of conducting their business is one of skepticism with the motto being “nothing can be known with certainty to be impossible in the realm of economic phenomena.” Even more precisely, since empiricism conceives of economic phenomena as objective data, extending in space and subject to quantifiable measurement—in strict analogy to the phenomena of the natural sciences—the peculiar skepticism of the empiricist economist may be described as that of a social engineer who will not guarantee anything.[^3]

[^3]: On the relativistic consequences of empiricism-positivism see also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989), chap. 6; idem, “The Intellectual Cover for Socialism,” *Free Market* (February 1988); see also infra chap. 11.

The other challenge came from the side of the Historicist School. Indeed, during Mises’s life in Austria and Switzerland, the historicist philosophy was the prevailing ideology of the German speaking universities and their establishment. With the upsurge of empiricism its former prominence has been reduced considerably. However, over roughly the last decade historicism has regained momentum among the Western world’s academia. Today it is pervasive under the names of hermeneutics, rhetoric, deconstructivism, and epistemological anarchism.[^4]

[^4]: See Ludwig von Mises, *The Historical Setting of the Austrian School of Economics* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1984); idem, *Erinnerungen* (Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer, 1978); idem, *Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985), chap. 10; Murray N. Rothbard, *Ludwig von Mises: Scholar, Creator, Hero* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); for a critical survey of historicist ideas see also Karl R. Popper, *The Poverty of Historicism* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1957); for a representative of the older version of a historicist interpretation of economics see Werner Sombart, *Die drei Nationalökonomien* (Munich: Duncker and Humblot, 1930); for the modern, hermeneutical twist Donald McCloskey, *The Rhetoric of Economics* (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1985); Ludwig Lachmann, “From Mises to Shackle: An Essay on Austrian Economics and the Kaleidic Society,” *Journal of Economic Literature* 14, no. 1 (1976).

For historicism, and most conspicuously for its contemporary versions, the model is not nature but a literary text. According to the historicist doctrine, economic phenomena are not objective magnitudes that can be measured. Instead, they are subjective expressions and interpretations unfolding in history to be understood and interpreted by the economist just as a literary text unfolds before and is interpreted by its reader. As subjective creations, the sequence of their events follows no objective law. Nothing in the literary text and nothing in the sequence of historical expressions and interpretations is governed by constant relations. Of course, certain literary texts actually exist, and so do certain sequences of historical events. But this by no means implies that anything had to happen in the order it did. It simply occurred. In the same way as one can always invent different literary stories, history and the sequence of historical events might also have happened in an entirely different way. Moreover, according to historicism, and particularly visible in its modern hermeneutical version, the formation of these always contingently related human expressions and their interpretations are also not constrained by any objective law. In literary production anything can be expressed or interpreted in any way, and along the same line, historical and economic events are whatever someone expresses or interprets them to be, and their description by the historian and economist is then whatever he expresses or interprets these past subjective events to have been.

De attitude wey historicist philosophy don generates na one of relativism. E motto na “everything dey possible.” Unconstrained by any objective law, history, economics, and literary criticism na matters of esthetics for de historicist-hermeneutician. As evidence be like dat, e output don take on de form of disquisitions on wetin person feel about wetin he feel say anoda person dey feel. This na literary y form wit wetin we don dey too familiar wit, particularly for fields like sociology and political science.[^5]

[^5]: For extreme relativism of historicism-hermeneutics go see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism”; Murray N. Rothbard, “The Hermeneutical Invasion of Philosophy and Economics,” Review of Austrian Economics 3 (1988); Henry Veatch, “Deconstruction in Philosophy: Has Rorty Made it the Denouement of Contemporary Analytical Philosophy,” Review of Metaphysics (1985); Steven Horwitz and Peter Boettke, “Misesian Integrity: A Comment on Barnes,” Austrian Economics Newsletter (Fall, 1987); David Gordon, Hermeneutics vs. Austrian Economics (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, Occasional Paper Series, 1987); for a brilliant critique of contemporary sociology see Stanislav Andreski, Social Science as Sorcery (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1973).

Person dey senses intuitively say sometin dey seriously wrong for both de empiricist as well as de historicist philosophies. Dia epistemological accounts nor even seem to dey fit dia own models wey dem don choose: nature for de one hand and literary texts for de oda. In any case, wit regard to economic propositions like de law of marginal utility or de quantity theory of money, dia accounts seem to dey simply wrong. De law of marginal utility certainly no dey strike person as hypothetical law wey dey foreva subject for e validation to confirming or disconfirming experiences wey dey pop up here or dere. And to conceive of de phenomena wey dem refer to for law as quantifiable magnitudes seem to dey nothing short of ridiculous. Nor be say de historicist interpretation seem to dey any beta. To think say de relationship between de events wey dem refer to for de quantity theory of money fit dey undone if person only wish am dey absurd. De idea appears no less absurd dat concepts like money, demand for money, and purchasing power dey formed without any objective constraints and dey refer merely to whimsical subjective creations. Instead, as against de empiricist doctrine, both examples of economic propositions appear to dey logically true and to refer to events wey dey subjective in nature. Contrary to historicism, e go seem say wetin they state nor fit dey possible to dey undone in all of history and contain conceptual distinctions wey, while dem refer to subjective events, dey nonetheless objectively constrained and incorporate universally valid knowledge

Like most of de economists wey dey beta known before am, Mises share dese intuitions.[^6] Yet for e quest for de foundation of economics, Mises go beyond intuition. He come take on de challenge wey empiricism and historicism don bring out in order to reconstruct de basis for which dese intuitions fit dey understood as correct and justified systematically. Even no want make e come  bring about  new discipline for economics, but as he dey explain wetin formerly dey only  grasped intuitively, Mises don go far beyond wetin dem don do before. In reconstructing de rational foundations of economists’ intuitions, he give us assurance for de proper path for any future development in economics and safeguards us against systematic intellectual error.


[^6]: Regarding de epistemological views of de kind predecessors like Jean Baptiste Say, Nassau W. Senior, John E. Cairnes, John Stuart Mill, Carl Menger, and Friedrich Wieser, see Ludwig von Mises, Epistemological Problems of Economics (New York: New York University Press, 1981), pp. 17–23; also Murray N. Rothbard, “Praxeology: The Methodology of Austrian Economics,” in Edwin Dolan, ed., The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1976); Hoppe, Praxeology and Economic Science.


Empiricism and historicism, as Mises notes for de outset of e reconstruction, get self-contradictory doctrines.[^7] The empiricist notion say all events, natural or economic, dey only hypothetically related dey contradicted by de message of dis very basic empiricist proposition eself, for if to say dis proposition dey regarded as itself being merely hypothetically true (i.e., hypothetically true proposition regarding hypothetically true propositions), e nor go even qualify as  epistemological pronouncement. E nor go provide justification whatsoeva for de claim say economic propositions nor be and nor fit be categorically, or a priori, true as we own intuition don inform us say dem be. If, howeva, de basic empiricist premise bin dey assumed to dey categorically true (i.e., if we wan assume say person fit yearn  sometin a priori true about de way events dey related), den dis go deny e very own thesis say empirical knowledge gats invariably dey hypothetical knowledge, as e go come make room for discipline like economics wey claim to produce priori valid empirical knowledge. Still on de matta, de empiricist thesis say economic phenomena gats dey conceived as observable and measurable magnitudes—analogous to dose of de natural sciences—dey rendered inconclusive on e own account, for empiricism dey provide us wit meaningful empirical knowledge wen e inform us say our economic concepts dey grounded for observations. Howeva, de concepts of observation and measurement, wey empiricism gats employ to dey claim wetin e dey do, demselves nor dey obviously derived from observational experience in de sense say concepts like hens and eggs or apples and pears be. Person nor fit observe somebody wey dey make observation or measurement. Rada, person gats first understand wetin observations and measurements be in order to be able to interpret certain observable phenomena as de making of observation or the taking of  measurement. As e be so, contrary to e own doctrine, empiricism dey compelled to admit say  empirical knowledge dey wey dey based on understanding—just like wetin we own intuitions economic propositions claim to dey based on understanding rada dan on observations.[^8]

[^7]: In addition to Mises’s works wey dey cited for de outset of dis chapter and de literature mentioned in note 1, see Murray N. Rothbard, Individualism and the Philosophy of the Social Sciences (San Francisco: Cato Institute, 1979); for splendid philosophical critique of empiricist economics see Martin Hollis and Edward Nell, Rational Economic Man (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975); for particularly valuable defenses for rationalism against empiricism and relativism—wey nor get reference to economics—see Brand Blanshard, Reason and Analysis (La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1964); Friedrich Kambartel, Erfahrung und Struktur. Bausteine zu einer Kritik des Empirismus und Formalismus (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968).


[^8]: For an elaborate defense of epistemological dualism see also K.O. Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie*, 2 vols. (Frankfurt/M: Suhrkamp, 1973); Jürgen Habermas, *Zur Logik der Sozialwissenschaften* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1970).

Regarding historicism, its self-contradictions are no less manifest. If, as historicism claims, historical and economic events, which it conceives of as sequences of subjectively understood rather than observed events, are not governed by constant, time-invariant relations, then this very proposition also cannot claim to say anything constantly true about history and economics. Instead, it would be a proposition with a fleeting truth value: it may be true now, if we wish, yet possibly false in a moment, in case we do not, and no one would ever know whether we do or do not. However, if this were the status of the basic historicist premise, it too would obviously not qualify as epistemology. Historicism would not have given us any reason why we should believe any of it. If, however, the basic proposition of historicism were assumed to be invariantly true, then such a proposition about the constant nature of historical and economic phenomena would contradict its own doctrine denying any such constants. Furthermore, the historicist’s (and even more so its modern heir, the hermeneutician’s) claim that historical and economic events are mere subjective creations, unconstrained by any objective factors, is proven false by the very statement making it. Evidently, a historicist must assume this very statement to be meaningful and true; he must presume to say something specific about something, rather than merely to utter meaningless sounds such as abracadabra. However, if this is the case, clearly his statement must be assumed to be constrained by something outside the realm of arbitrary subjective creations. Of course, I can say what the historicist says in English, German, Chinese, or any other language I wish, and in so far historic and economic expressions and interpretations may well be regarded as mere subjective creations. But whatever I say in whatever language I choose must be assumed to be constrained by some underlying propositional meaning of my statement, which is the same for any language, and exists completely independent of whatever the peculiar linguistic form may be in which it is expressed. Contrary to historicist belief, the existence of such a constraint is not such that one could possibly dispose of it at will. Rather, it is objective in that we can understand it to be the logically necessary presupposition for saying anything meaningful at all, as opposed to merely producing meaningless sounds. The historicist could not claim to say anything if it were not for the fact that his expressions and interpretations are actually constrained by laws of logic as the very presupposition of meaningful statements as such.[^9]

[^9]: See on this in particular Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism.”

With such a refutation of empiricism and historicism, Mises notices, the claims of rationalist philosophy are successfully reestablished, and the case is made for the possibility of a priori true statements, as those of economics seem to be. Indeed, Mises explicitly regards his own epistemological investigations as the continuation of the work of western rationalist philosophy. With Leibniz and Kant he stands opposite the tradition of Locke and Hume.[^10] He takes Leibniz’s side when he answers Locke’s famous dictum “nothing is in the intellect that has not previously been in the senses” with his equally famous one “except the intellect itself.” And he recognizes his task as a philosopher of economics as strictly analogous to that of Kant’s as a philosopher of pure reason (i.e., of epistemology). Like Kant, Mises wants to demonstrate the existence of true a priori synthetic propositions, or propositions whose truth values can be definitely established, even though for such an undertaking the means of formal logic are insufficient and observations are unnecessary.

[^10]: See Ludwig von Mises, *The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1978), p. 12.

This criticism of empiricism and historicism has proved the general rationalist claim. It has proved that we indeed do possess knowledge which is not derived from observation yet is constrained by objective laws. In fact, our refutation of empiricism and historicism contains such a priori synthetic knowledge. Yet what about the constructive task of showing that the propositions of economics—such as the law of marginal utility and the quantity theory of money—qualify as this type of knowledge? In order to do so, Mises notices in accordance with the strictures traditionally formulated by rationalist philosophers, economic propositions must fulfill two requirements. First, it must be possible to demonstrate that they are not derived from observational evidence, for observational evidence can only reveal things as they happen to be: there is nothing in it that would indicate why things must be the way they are. Instead, economic propositions must be shown to be grounded in reflective cognition, in our understanding of ourselves as knowing subjects. Second, this reflective understanding must yield certain propositions as self-evident material axioms, not in the sense that such axioms would have to be self-evident in a psychological sense, that is, that one would have to be immediately aware of them or that their truth depends on a psychological feeling of conviction. On the contrary, like Kant before him, Mises stresses the fact that it is usually much more painstaking to discover such axioms than it is to discover some observational truth such as that the leaves of trees are green or that I am 6 foot 2 inches.[^11] Rather, what makes them self-evident material axioms is the fact that no one can deny their validity without self-contradiction, for in attempting to deny them one already presupposes their validity.

[^11]: See Immanuel Kant, *Kritik der reinin Vernunft*, in idem, *Werke*, 12 vols., ed. W. Weischedel (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968), vol. 3, p. 45; Ludwig von Mises, *Human Action: A Treatise on Economics* (Chicago: Regnery, l966), p. 38.

Mises points out that both requirements are fulfilled by what he terms the axiom of action (i.e., the proposition that humans act, that they display intentional behavior).[^12] Obviously, this axiom is not derived from observation—there are only bodily movements to be observed but no such thing as actions—but stems instead from reflective understanding. And this understanding concerns a self-evident proposition, for its truth cannot be denied, since the denial would itself have to be categorized as an action. But is this not just trivial? And what has economics got to do with this? Of course, it was previously recognized that economic concepts such as prices, costs, production, money, and credit had something to do with the fact that there were acting people. But that and how all of economics could be grounded in and reconstructed based on such a trivial proposition, is anything but clear. It is one of Mises’s greatest achievements to have shown precisely that there are insights implied in this psychologically speaking trivial axiom of action that were not themselves psychologically self-evident as well; and that it is these insights which provide the foundation for the theorems of economics as true a priori synthetic propositions.

[^12]: On the following see in particular Mises, *Human Action*, chap. IV; Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1962), chap. 1.

It is certainly not psychologically evident that with every action an actor pursues a goal, and that whatever the goal may be, the fact that it was pursued by an actor reveals that he must have placed a relatively higher value on it than on any other goal of action that he could have thought of at the start of his action. It is not evident that in order to achieve his most highly valued goal an actor must interfere or decide not to interfere (which is also an intentional interference) at an earlier point in time in order to produce a later result, nor is it obvious that such interferences invariably imply the employment of some scarce means—at least those of the actor’s body, its standing room, and the time absorbed by the action. It is not self-evident that these means must also have value for an actor—a value derived from that of the goal—because the actor must regard their employment as necessary in order to effectively achieve the goal; and that actions can only be performed sequentially and always involve the choice of taking up that one course of action which at some given time promises the most highly valued results to the actor and excluding at the same time the pursual of other, less highly valued goals. It is not automatically clear that as a consequence of having to choose and give preference to one goal over another—of not being able to realize all goals simultaneously—each and every action implies the incurrence of costs (forsaking the value attached to the most highly ranking alternative goal that cannot be realized or whose realization must be deferred) because the means necessary to attain it are bound up in the production of another, even more highly valued goal. Finally, it is not evident that at its starting point every goal of action must be considered worth more to the actor than its cost and capable of yielding a profit (a result whose value is ranked higher than that of the foregone opportunity), and that every action is also invariably threatened by the possibility of a loss if an actor finds in retrospect that contrary to his expectations the actually achieved result has a lower value than the relinquished alternative would have had.

All of these categories which we know to be the very heart of economics—values, ends, means, choice, preference, cost, profit and loss—are implied in the axiom of action. Like the axiom itself, they are not derived from observation. Rather, that one is able to interpret observations in terms of such categories requires that one already knows what it means to act. No one who is not an actor could ever understand them, as they are not “given,” ready to be observed, but observational experience is cast in these terms as it is construed by an actor. Further, while they and their interrelations are not obviously implied in the action axiom, once it has been made explicit that and how they are implied, one no longer has any difficulty recognizing them as being a priori true in the same sense as the axiom itself is. Any attempt to disprove the validity of what Mises has reconstructed as implied in the very concept of action would have to be aimed at a goal, requiring means, excluding other courses of action, incurring costs, subjecting the actor to the possibility of achieving or not achieving the desired goal, and leading to a profit or a loss. Thus, it is manifestly impossible to dispute or falsify the validity of Mises’s insights. In fact, a situation in which the categories of action would cease to have a real existence could itself never be observed or spoken of, as making an observation or speaking are also actions.

All true economic propositions, and this is what praxeology is all about and what Mises’s great insight consists of, can be deduced by means of formal logic from this incontestably true material knowledge regarding the meaning of action and its categories. More precisely, all true economic theorems consist of (a) an understanding of the meaning of action, (b) a situation or situational change—assumed to be given or identified as being given—and described in terms of action-categories, and (c) a logical deduction of the consequences—again in terms of such categories—which are to result for an actor from this situation or situational change. For instance, the law of marginal utility[^13] follows from our indisputable knowledge of the fact that every actor always prefers what satisfies him more over what satisfies him less, plus the assumption that he is faced with an increase in the supply of a good (a scarce mean) whose units he regards as of equal serviceability by one additional unit. From this it follows with logical necessity that this additional unit can only be employed as a means for the removal of an uneasiness that is deemed less urgent than the least valuable goal previously satisfied by a unit of such a good. Provided there is no flaw in the process of deduction, the conclusions which economic theorizing yields must be valid a priori. These propositions’ validity ultimately goes back to the indisputable axiom of action. To think, as empiricism does, that these propositions require continual empirical testing for their validation is absurd and a sign of outright intellectual confusion. And it is no less absurd and confused to believe, as does historicism, that economics has nothing to say about constant and invariable relations but merely deals with historically accidental events. To say so is to prove such a statement wrong, as saying anything meaningful at all already presupposes acting and a knowledge of the meaning of the categories of action.

[^13]: On the law of marginal utility see Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 119–27; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 268–71.
